All right, so first off, welcome everyone.
I'm David Uminski, I'm the Executive Director
of the Data Institute.
If this is your first time in the Data Institute, welcome.
There's a ton of things going on here,
including this class, which is what's brought you all in.
Every Friday we have a weekly seminar
on all things data science, including ethics as well.
And I'm delighted that this is the inaugural class.
There's been a tremendous amount of interest and volume
as well as thought put into this class.
And we're excited to launch for the very first time
to the public, and then we're gonna have other classes
for graduate students and undergraduate students eventually.
But you guys are the first to have Rachel teach
a formal class in data ethics.
I know, right?
So congratulations.
So if you have any questions around things like wireless
and all that stuff, I can't help you.
But there are people here to help you.
And Michaela in particular, who I think has been
your point of contact, is gonna be your most useful.
She's still outside, I believe.
But without further ado, I know why you guys are here.
Rachel Thomas is the Center for Applied Data Ethics Director,
the inaugural director, and she was our number one choice,
as you can imagine, for anyone to launch anything
in ethics here at the institute.
She's got an amazing background and experience.
And besides being a prolific writer,
she got her PhD from Duke in mathematics
and is the co-founder of Fast.ai,
which is also on the side deck.
So without further ado, let's welcome Rachel to the class.
Thank you, David.
Thank you.
Thanks, yeah.
So welcome, everyone.
It's great to have such a full room for this.
So data ethics is kind of in the news,
I would say really pretty much every day now,
all sorts of kind of really concerning developments.
I'm gonna start this evening with just three quick examples
that I kind of want everyone to know about
and the types of problems we'll be thinking about
in this class.
And I'll say a little bit about the class
and then we'll get into the first topic,
which is disinformation.
So one example that comes up a lot in data ethics
is feedback loops.
And so a feedback loop occurs whenever your model
is controlling the next round of data that you get.
And so your data kind of quickly becomes flawed
or at least influenced by the software itself.
And this is something I think particularly many of us
from science backgrounds tend to overlook
because you're thinking, oh, I'm observing the world
and kind of seeing what's happening in the data.
But if you're building any sort of product
that's being used,
you're also having kind of this big influence.
And so one place we see this is with recommendation systems
where, you know, ostensibly they're predicting
what content people will like,
but they're also controlling what content
people are exposed to.
Second, and I should note,
I'll be kind of stopping periodically for questions
and we will have some time for discussion
and the later classes will be a bit
kind of more discussion oriented.
Second instance that I think about
is when systems are implemented with no way to identify
or address mistakes.
And so this is something that kind of happens,
you know, outside the data itself,
but thinking about the broader system that it's within.
And so this is a headline from an article
following when a new system was implemented in Arkansas
for determining people's Medicaid benefits.
So this was for poor people accessing medical care
that they needed and there was a software bug
that incorrectly cut the care for people with cerebral palsy
including Tammy Dobbs pictured here.
And so not just for kind of people losing access
to care they needed,
but there was no way to even point out
or discover that there was a mistake
because there was no system for recourse
and nobody was on the lookout for mistakes.
Unfortunately, this was eventually kind of surfaced
through a lengthy court case,
but this is another kind of important consideration to have
of kind of how, you know,
what safety mechanisms do you have in place
to discover when something's gone wrong.
And then a kind of third example
when everyone to know about is study by Latanya Sweeney,
who's director of the data privacy lab at Harvard,
has her PhD in computer science.
And she discovered several years ago
that when you Google her name,
you get ads saying Latanya Sweeney arrested.
This is for a background check company.
And she's the only person with that name.
She's never been arrested.
She paid $50 and confirmed her background check says
that she's never been arrested.
However, when you Google other names like Kristin Lindquist,
you get a much more neutral ad saying,
we found Kristin Lindquist
from the same background check company.
And so being a computer scientist,
she wanted to approach this systematically.
She looked at over 2000 names
and confirmed that this pattern held
that kind of traditionally African-American names
were getting the ads suggesting
that they had a criminal record
regardless of whether they did,
whereas kind of traditionally white
or European-American names
were getting much more neutral language.
And this is something that continues to be an issue.
I mean, what was going on in this particular case
is the background check company said
that they were placing both versions of the ad
for each name, but Google ads automatically
lets you do AB testing.
And so people were clicking on the ad
suggesting that someone with an African-American name
was more likely to have a criminal record.
And that was kind of what was winning in the AB testing.
And kind of similar issues continue to surface.
Research less than a year ago showed
that Facebook's ad system seems to discriminate
by race and gender,
even when the advertiser is not trying to.
For housing ads, having the exact same text,
but switching the picture between a white family
and a black family served up very different audiences.
So these are kind of ongoing and urgent issues,
a common issue of bias,
which we'll be talking about more next week.
So as David mentioned,
this is the Center for Applied Data Ethics,
kind of housed within the USF Data Institute.
If you're interested, we have data ethics seminars
a few times a semester that are open to the public.
We had a tech policy workshop in November,
and we'll be releasing all the videos from that soon.
And then just briefly some background about me.
I've worked at the Data Institute for three and a half years.
I've also worked professionally as a data scientist
and software engineer.
If you're kind of interested in some of my other writing
or Twitter, it tends to mostly be about data ethics.
So here's my email and feel free to reach out to me
with any questions kind of about the course or in general.
So some course logistics.
My plan is to give a kind of weekly quiz,
mostly just to check if you've done the reading
and also to incentivize doing the reading.
I also started a spreadsheet of AI ethics issues
in the news each week.
And this is an idea I borrowed from Casey Fiesler,
who's another tech ethics professor.
And I thought that could be kind of interesting to see
and the hope is that everyone could contribute
one article each week and to see what happens
over the six weeks of the course.
And then there'll be an optional writing assignment.
If you're interested, you can research and reflect
on the ethics issue of your choice
and I'm happy to give you feedback on a draft
if you're interested in posting it as a blog post later.
I was gonna use forums.fast.ai for discussion.
And this is what we've used
with the deep learning courses.
And it's a pretty nice software.
It's open source discourse in terms of it has great
search functionality when you start entering something.
And so I've started a few threads.
In particular, I started an introduce yourself here
if you wanna write an introduction,
because I definitely hope to get to know more
about all of you over the course of the course
and I hope that you get to know each other
and can kind of build some community around people
that are interested in data ethics.
And so this will be a great place
to kind of keep the discussion going.
I did wanna let you know I have this set to private
right now just for people in the course,
but I was planning to open it to public
after the course ends.
Let me know if you have concerns about that.
It was something more ultimately,
and also I'm recording the course right now to share,
but I hope to get kind of more people involved
in discussing data ethics.
And I'll let you know before I do that.
So I always interested to read other tech ethics syllabi
and have spent a lot of time doing that.
And Casey Fiesler, who's a professor
at the University of Colorado,
created a crowdsourced spreadsheet of over 200 syllabi
for tech ethics courses.
This was maybe a year or two ago.
And then she did a meta analysis on what do we teach
when we teach tech ethics,
which I thought was really interesting.
And she highlighted there kind of a number of open questions
or controversies about how to best teach tech ethics.
Should it be a standalone course
or integrated into every course in a curriculum?
Who should teach it?
So it resides in a lot of different departments.
If you look across schools,
should it be a computer scientist,
a philosopher, or sociologist?
This is a chart kind of just showing the discipline
of what department these courses were taught in,
of the ones she looked at.
What topics to cover is a huge question.
And there was kind of a lengthy list
of law and policy, privacy and surveillance, philosophy,
justice and human rights, civic responsibility,
AI and robots, and the list goes on.
And so this is far more than you can fit in any course,
even if we had twice as long as we do,
we would not be able to cover
kind of more than a fraction of this.
Oh, and then what learning outcomes?
And this is something where there is a little bit more
of consistency, that kind of one of the top goals
of tech ethics courses is to teach the skill of critique
and spotting issues, also making arguments.
So hopefully we'll get to some of that.
Yeah, so I share this just to say
that we won't be able to cover everything
and that that's kind of typical of tech ethics courses
and that there is this huge variety,
but hopefully some of the skills around kind of discussion
and spotting issues and thinking about them
will transfer even to other areas.
So the syllabus, and hopefully you received this,
Michaela sent it out.
I also have it posted in the forums.
If you have any trouble accessing the forums
or creating account, feel free to email me.
And that's something where I have to add you.
And so I've tried adding everyone's email
for the email you use to sign up for the course.
But if you haven't created an account yet,
then I have to kind of go back and add it.
So just let me know when you do.
Oh, and one other note that I forgot earlier,
but I want to introduce a special,
not really guest, but new resident.
This is Ali Al-Khatib.
And he's joining us as part of our kind of first class
of, we haven't officially announced this yet,
but Data Ethics Fellows here
at the Center for Applied Data Ethics.
So he'll be here.
And so briefly, so I'm gonna kind of,
I want to start with kind of two,
so this week disinformation and next week bias,
kind of two really in-depth,
more than a case study, but kind of like an issue
and really kind of thinking about the issue in depth
and then kind of circling back to more,
just even talking about what are ethical frames we can use,
what are tools we can use to address these.
But I think it'll help ground us
to kind of first have these issues.
So I'm just gonna briefly say this evening
that ethics is the discipline
dealing with what's good and bad,
or a set of moral principles.
I linked to or assigned this article
from the Markkula Center,
and then there's another great one
of just kind of overview of ethics
and ethics is not the same as religion, law,
social norms or feelings, although it does have overlap
with all those things to varying degrees.
It's not a fixed set of rules.
Ethics is well-founded standards of right and wrong.
And it's also the study and development
of your ethical standards.
And that kind of needs to be a continuous
and ongoing process kind of as we encounter new situations.
Actually, I'll stop and pause.
Are there any questions just about the class
before we launch into disinformation tonight?
Yes, Erin.
The Alton Lab with the Jupyter notebook
and I saw that you had that as supplemental
or at least today, but are you trying to have
something more practical at the end of each course?
That's a good question.
I forgot, I'm gonna use the catch box in general.
But so the question was,
is there gonna be a supplemental kind of coding lab
at the end of each lesson?
The answer is probably not.
I had wanted to, but I kind of with time
and with some of the topics, I don't think that'll happen.
But I would love to do that kind of in future iterations.
Yeah, and this course has essentially no prerequisites.
I want this to be open to everyone,
but I also hope you can use kind of whatever
particular skills you have from your background.
Yes.
Just on ethics itself,
are we gonna focus on that in any particular area
or is there a way to come back to each topic?
So it's something we'll come back to.
In lesson three, we'll talk about
a few different ethical frames and deontological ethics,
consequentialist ethics and virtue ethics
that can potentially be used.
And we'll also talk about kind of toolkit of processes
you can implement.
Although on the whole, the focus of the course
will be on kind of the applied side in particular cases.
Thanks.
So let's dive into disinformation,
which I think is very kind of relevant and urgent issue.
So in 2016, a group called the Heart of Texas
posted on Facebook about a protest to be held outside
an Islamic center in Houston.
And then another group called for a counter protest.
So people kind of showed up on both sides.
You had kind of the counter protest
supporting freedom of religion and inclusivity.
And a reporter from the Houston Chronicle
noticed something unusual,
which is that he was not able to get in touch
with the organizers for either side.
And it came out kind of only months later
that actually both sides were organized by Russian trolls.
And so this is something that is,
it kind of captures how real people
can really get caught up in disinformation.
And this is also different than the idea of quote,
fake news in that the people on both sides
kind of were acting on beliefs they had,
but they were doing it in a way
that was framed kind of very deceptively
by foreign operatives who weren't who they claimed.
So I think this is kind of an important example
to keep in mind and also just how kind of tangible
this is in the real world,
that these are kind of real people protesting again
in this frame that was created in a deceptive way.
So disinformation has been in the news a lot,
I think particularly with respect to deepfakes videos,
but that's just one form of disinformation
and we'll talk about many others.
And tonight, I want to get a bit into
what isn't disinformation,
how do the tech platforms make it worse,
how will new advances in AI make it worse,
and what should we do?
So this is a site called Radio Africa,
purporting to be a local news source in Khartoum, Sudan.
And it came out this fall that this was set up by Russians
as part of a influence operation
in six different African countries,
where they created kind of what seemed to be
local news sources and in some cases
hired locals as journalists.
And they had 73 Facebook pages
with over nine million interactions on them.
And they used WhatsApp and Telegram as well.
So this was kind of multi-platform,
they're encouraging people to join groups.
And it wasn't just kind of false stories
or even stories promoting Russia,
it also included the type of thing that you would see
kind of promoting local tourism.
There was kind of stories about sports and culture
and a wide variety of stories.
So disinformation is a lot more than just fake news.
And in fact, Claire Wardle,
who's a kind of excellent expert in this area,
discourages the use of the term fake news
because it's not just news,
it's memes and videos and social media posts.
Another article that I included,
actually curious who did the reading for this week?
Oh, awesome.
Okay, great job, everyone.
So this was about a kind of campaign in 2014,
as you probably read, where some trolls on Fortran
said that they wanted to get the hashtag
cancel Father's Day trending.
They wanted to pretend to be black women to do this
as an effort to kind of make feminists look bad.
And they were successful in getting this hashtag picked up.
And then several kind of far right media outlets,
you know, picked up like, oh, look at this hashtag trending.
And so this is, so they created accounts like,
nae nae can't stop, which again,
is a totally kind of fraudulent account.
And this is something because it was posted on Fortran was,
well, it was discovered because the accounts
were not that convincing,
particularly to the kind of black women
that were in the same community that the trolls
were ostensibly trying to imitate,
and then was confirmed that it was fake.
And so, and this also kind of captures
that with disinformation,
people can have very different motives.
I think in some cases,
there are people that maybe think that they're being ironic
in kind of promoting something that's offensive
or kind of enjoying the kind of hoax aspect
of wanting to trick others.
There are other people though,
that may be outraged by it and take it very seriously.
And so you tend to have kind of a range of motivations
and also emotions that may be kind of evoked
by various materials.
And you've got this whole mix of rumors and hoaxes,
propaganda, misleading content, misleading context.
Most of it is misleading, not fake.
So a lot of people refer to fabricated news
as something that is totally made up.
But a lot of it, there's this kind of this spectrum of,
if you think of how to lie with statistics,
you can give a statistic that is technically true
in a particular context,
but which has been presented in a way
that's super misleading.
And that's often used.
And then also the term fake news has been co-opted
and is being used to attack the press.
And so this is kind of why Claire Wardle
recommends staying away from this term,
which I mostly try to do.
Any questions so far?
Okay.
Disinformation also includes orchestrated campaigns
of manipulation.
So it's not necessarily just like a single post,
but this kind of entire campaign and network.
And so we kind of saw that with this example
of the Russian operations in six countries
that was uncovered this fall.
And that was uncovered
by the Stanford Internet Observatory.
Disinformation is an ecosystem.
And so Kate Starbird of the University of Washington
has done a lot of work kind of looking
at both Twitter and websites of kind of who links to who.
And so this is a kind of diagram
of people tweeting about the Syrian white helmets.
And blue is kind of supportive or positive towards them.
And pink is negative or opposed to.
And she, in this example, found that
most of the people tweeting about this
seem to be kind of sincere, genuine people, not operatives.
But if you looked at kind of what sites
they were linking to,
there were a few sites that showed up over and over.
So you see YouTube was a huge one here.
Also Russia Today, Sputnik News.
And so this is something
where you kind of have to think about this,
it's not just within Twitter,
but kind of who's being linked to.
And again, you can have genuine people
perhaps sharing information from questionable sources.
And Claire Wardle talks about this idea
of the trumpet of amplification.
And it's how ideas or means can make it
from 4chan or 8chan,
eventually into our kind of mainstream media conversation.
And one common path is kind of to first be picked up
by closed messaging groups,
such as on WhatsApp, Telegram, or Facebook Messenger,
where things are widely shared.
Then they may jump into kind of conspiracy communities
on Reddit or YouTube, from there to social media,
and then are often covered kind of by
professional media or politicians.
Although we have seen examples
where it's a much shorter chain
and things kind of jump there sooner.
And so this makes it though,
it's like a very difficult problem
to even study or address
because you're looking at kind of
so many different companies and sites and organizations.
And because this can move very quickly between sites,
people can also, or at least the phenomena
can kind of leverage inconsistencies
in the rules or enforcement of different sites.
And one of the reasons I think that this is really important
to kind of be thinking about and working on
is that disinformation undermines democracy.
Ladislav Bittmann, who used to work
for a kind of Soviet disinformation office,
I believe in the 60s, and then defected to the United States
and later became a professor of disinformation,
said most campaigns are a carefully designed mixture
of facts, half truths, exaggerations, and deliberate lies.
I've heard other people say that, you know,
good propaganda contains seeds of truth.
So again, there's not, you know,
necessarily kind of a clear distinction, true or false.
Kate Starbird said disinformation
is not just about bots and trolls.
It targets, cultivates, shapes,
and ultimately leverages unwitting crowds
to further spread and achieve its objectives.
And we saw that kind of with that first example
of people actually attending protest.
Totally unwittingly, you know, when I saw the protesters
that support freedom of religion and diversity,
I liked many of their signs, I can relate,
but they're, you know, being leveraged
kind of as part of a part of this campaign.
So we saw that here.
And then disinformation pollutes our information environment.
And so Zainab Tafekci, who's kind of one of the foremost
experts in this area and has also really studied
kind of the role of technology in protest around the world,
says when I talk to dissidents around the world,
they rarely ask me how they can post information
anonymously, but they do often ask me
how to authenticate the information they post.
Dissidents can end up putting their lives on the line
to post a picture documenting wrongdoing,
only to be faced with an endless stream
of deliberately misleading claims.
That the picture was taken 10 years ago,
that it's from somewhere else, that it's been doctored.
And Zainab definitely supports that there are people
that need to post anonymously, particularly whistleblowers
may need to have, you know, kind of stable pseudonyms
that they can use in sharing.
So I thought this was really kind of interesting perspective
about how often people can be discredited
and people want a way to authenticate what they're sharing.
Because the problem with disinformation
is not just that we may believe things that are not true,
but that we may not believe things that are true.
And that's kind of a real risk
and something that's already happening.
Kind of related issue that Zainab has spoken about
is how the nature of censorship has really changed.
And censorship now works by flooding people with information,
by causing distraction, causing confusion,
creating doubts and just this question mark and shadow
so that you can't really figure out what's going on.
And so she was in particular talking about
kind of the WikiLeaks dump method
and saying that just kind of releasing things
isn't necessarily whistleblowing.
She refers to it as whistle drowning,
although this happens kind of even more broadly
than just document dumps,
but that kind of we're just flooded and inundated
with information and can drown out really important,
kind of important news that we need to hear.
And so kind of in the context of releasing
large troves of documents,
this is referred to as hack and leak,
includes climate gate and Hillary Clinton's emails.
And what happens is something called narrative laundering,
where people can build stories on top of real documents.
And so kind of taking real documents,
but then using them towards kind of certain ends
to try to create a narrative.
Something that experts such as Renee DiResta
have warned about is that we may see more
mixing faked documents in with real documents.
And so there was a set of cyber attacks
on anti-doping agencies sometime last year.
And people say that there were kind of some fake documents
mixed in, mixed into that.
Let me pause.
Are there any questions?
I have a question,
but just kind of through the narrative laundering,
one place that I guess I'm-
And can you hold the catch box a little bit closer?
So one place like I've seen narrative laundering,
especially as something like National Geographic and stuff
where they're filming animals
and then come up with a story.
I have a friend who's actually filming
for National Geographic and said he took months
and months of film and then sent it in.
They completely moved everything around
and like the clips are not actually in the order
that things take place.
And the story is totally written afterwards.
Oh yeah, that's an interesting example.
I think that also gets at that there,
I'm sure this happens with, you know,
any documentary is going to have to like cut down
the material and is imposing some sort of kind of frame
on what gets chosen.
And I think there are ways to do that ethically
and then also ways where you've become deceptive
with what you're doing.
And I don't know that it's always,
I'm sure there are a lot of in-between instances
where it may not be clear of like, okay,
this is an acceptable amount of editing and shaping.
And okay, now you've definitely crossed over
and are misleading people.
And I think that's also kind of an example
where you have just this huge volume of material
that you have to kind of cut down
because volume is one of the things
that I think enables this.
Just wondering if you have a concrete example
of narrative laundering since there are a few questions
around it, maybe it would help.
Sure, I mean, so I think like definitely like
with Climate Gate and, you know, that's something
where kind of all these emails from climate scientists
were hacked and released.
And really the discussions they were having
were completely reasonable.
Like there was not, I don't think any scientist thinks
there was like a controversy there
about what they were doing or how they were doing it,
but it was used to kind of things were taken out of context
and kind of put together to be like,
look, these climate scientists are lying to us.
They're kind of doing unethical things
to make it seem like climate change is happening
when it's not.
And so that kind of created this whole narrative
that was not accurate.
But it's something where kind of if you have enough volume
of documents, like I think it gets easier
and easier to do that.
So do we also see this type of pattern
where you have like highly like field specific,
so the scientific papers or medical papers
that take very specific clips out and then turn it
into a form of language as much more easily consumed.
So less like area specific language,
just common language that the masses can kind of consume
and understand in a, does it make sense?
So if I'm reading a medical paper,
which is maybe like 20 pages long,
I'm probably not gonna read the whole thing.
You can take a couple of sentences out of there,
they're true, and then build a story on top of that
that can be put into 140 characters or however many,
say I know, this is what I'm saying.
Just a typical pattern that we see with narrative laundering.
So like what you're describing I think often
would not be narrative laundering
because someone I think could be right making a story
that even though it's oversimplified could be very accurate.
And this I should check, but like this definition
was in the context of kind of I think like a massive volume
of documents, but you're right about the kind of the dynamic
of yeah, if you have a 20 page highly specialized paper,
for most people to understand it,
we do need someone to come along
and give us kind of a simpler story about it.
Although ideally that someone would be trustworthy
and would produce a story that was kind of accurate
and in keeping with what was there.
All right, another question.
Oh wait, can you send it back just for the recording?
So I guess kind of my answer that would be yes.
I was a psychology major undergrad
and read so many psych papers.
And one of the pieces of every published psych papers
there has to be a conclusion.
And so many psychologists take the study that they did
and as part of the conclusion they have to draw
real world applications, real world, how do you apply it?
And even though so many of the studies are just done
at colleges, mainly female participants,
they generalize it to everyone in the world,
even though it's done in the US
and they only apply to Americans.
And so they do a lot of this kind of creating a story
for the whole world where that may not be really
where it applies.
Yeah, and I think that this gets at broader issues
with scientific communication.
Although I do want to bring us back
to kind of disinformation specifically,
but yeah, they're all kind of perhaps similar issues
that show up in other forms of scientific communication.
Okay, I'll keep going.
We'll have more time for questions later
as we go on.
So now I want to talk a little bit about how
the kind of the role of the tech platforms
in incentivizing and promoting disinformation.
So this is kind of not something that happens in a vacuum.
And so this is mostly unintentional,
but it shows up in their design and architecture
and their recommendation systems,
in their business models around kind of what gets incentivized.
And so this is, you know, in a lot of these choices
when they were originally being made,
probably people weren't thinking about disinformation at all,
but they do kind of help create the ecosystem that we're in.
So Guillaume Chaslot is a former Google engineer
who worked on YouTube's recommendation algorithm
back in like 2013 and has been very vocal about it
since leaving.
He's also founder of Algo transparency group.
So this is a chart.
So he kind of monitors kind of YouTube's
recommendation system from the outside now.
This is a chart he created that was picked up
by the Washington Post.
And here the X-axis is the number of channels
recommending a video.
And the Y-axis is the log of the number of views.
And you see there's this extreme outlier
that was Russia Today's take on the Mueller report,
something that was being recommended a ton,
even though it was actually not ending up
kind of more popular like you might expect.
And I think this is kind of potential evidence
that the recommendation system can be gamed
or has been gamed, which I think is a risk really kind
of anytime that you're really relying on metrics.
Wrote a post about this in the fall, the problem with metrics
is a big problem for AI that kind of whenever
you put a lot of emphasis on a metric,
people can and will try to game it.
You also see maybe unexpected kind of behavior
or side effects to what you're doing.
So this is one frame for kind of for thinking
about disinformation and this has gotten
kind of a lot more media attention,
I would say in the last six months to a year
about the role of recommendation systems.
Another interesting study from this fall looked at
basically how people, so they asked people,
do you think this story is credible?
And they kind of balanced forgetting Republicans
and Democrats and found that people could identify
kind of whether a story was credible or not,
even across their political lines.
But then they also kind of a separate large group
of people asked, would you share this story or not?
And that was basically completely disconnected
from whether it was credible and was very tied
to political ties and so this kind of suggests
that when people are deciding whether to share something,
they're not even thinking like, is this credible?
There are a lot of other kind of emotions and factors
that go into kind of what gets shared.
And I liked in the paper, they highlighted
that social media platforms may tilt users away
from considering accuracy.
For instance, they encourage users to rapidly scroll
and spontaneously engage, so they're not necessarily
kind of encouraging people to spend a long time
thinking about a particular post or a particular article
before they share it.
They also mix very serious news content
with emotionally engaging content,
so often kind of a really engaging in this emotional way
and then also, you know, you've got a cat video
or a baby picture and then kind of some very like serious
or devastating political news or enraging political news
and it's all mixed together.
And then also we get this immediate quantified feedback
and the number of likes, which really kind of influences
people to kind of be getting that response.
And so none of this is particularly conducive
to getting people to stop and ask,
is this credible?
So in the study, they did, so there are kind of
a few parts to it, but in one part they DM'd people
a question and they said, we're doing a survey,
do you think the following link is credible?
And what they sent them was politically neutral,
so it wasn't something that should follow long party lines.
And they found that people that received this
seemed to tweet more credible links for 24 hours afterwards
that just even kind of prompting people to be like,
is this credible as a question that you should
potentially think about, potentially got them
to kind of think about that more.
And they only looked at it for 24 hours afterwards.
But I thought that was interesting.
And so that's, you know, a small study
and kind of one piece of data.
And then I'll also share this research from Becca Lewis
who's a PhD student at Stanford.
And she highlights that it's more than just the algorithm.
And this is not kind of incompatible with the algorithm
playing a role, but she looks at various kind of
other dynamics of celebrity culture on YouTube.
And so the paper I have listed here, she kind of does,
it's a qualitative case study kind of looking at a few
YouTube influencers and the way that they have kind of
positioned themselves as, you know, the mainstream media
is not telling you the truth, but I'm a lot more authentic
and credible.
And then also kind of the mainstream media is overly
pushing kind of liberal ideals, but I'm going to be authentic
and credible and kind of tell you these all alt-right ideals
and have kind of been effective at aligning these two
different axes.
And so that's interesting to also kind of keep in mind
these other social and cultural dynamics that impact this.
So summary, kind of our online environments are designed
to be addictive in many cases, so kind of the reading.
So I had an article from Guillaume Chaslot in the assigned
reading and he talked about how, and YouTube has updated
its algorithm, but in the early days it was about maximizing
watch time, which I think is true of many platforms.
They want to keep people on the platforms longer.
The incentives tend to really focus on short-term metrics.
And some of this is it's much harder to measure long-term
quantities of, you know, what is your long-term kind of trust
in the platform or, you know, even just like what's the
long-term health of the information being shared.
These are tough things to measure and so I think that
short-term incentives tend to get overemphasized.
And then finally, like the fundamental business model is
around manipulating people's behavior and monopolizing
their time.
And that's something that I think is okay in limited doses,
but that ultimately kind of doesn't lead for a great
alignment of incentives with the well-being of society.
And this is a slide that Renee DiResta, and so Renee is kind
of one of the top experts on computational propaganda, and
she led one of the teams that analyzed the Russian materials
for the Senate House Committee.
She was also kind of very involved in studying the
anti-vaxxer movement kind of years ago, shared our political
conversations are happening on an infrastructure built for
viral advertising.
And so here there's kind of this real mismatch.
So let me pause for a moment.
Are there questions on this kind of this component of the role
that the tech platforms play?
Question in the back, and let me...
Oh, perfect.
I think it's more of an observation as I'm going through
all these points, I'm thinking in particular back to DiResta's
article and the shifts in technology, radio to television
intelligence, my very broad unqualified observation is that
the technology has simply arrived to make this scale out
in the way it was intended.
I don't know that I see much difference in media, I just see
difference in the efficacy of this delivery system.
Yeah, I mean, so this definitely is more effective in some of
the...
Yeah, I mean, there's writing that was done on television in
the 80s that you read it, and it's like, oh, it sounds like
we're talking about the internet and the problems we're facing
now.
I mean, the scale is so...
Like the scale is significant that it is so big.
I mean, I think that around the incentives, like I think that,
I don't know, if we didn't have kind of personalized ad
targeting, I do think we would be in a different ecosystem, and
I think we would still have problems, but they would
probably be different problems and there'd be a different
nature to the ecosystem, but I think that these are kind of
particular choices.
You know, like we could...
There could be a world where we have the internet and kind of
mass communication, but where it's funneling in very
different ways.
And I do think, like in particular, personalized ad
targeting has kind of put us down a very particular path.
Kind of a more serious part.
So it's also important to note that humans really have kind of
evolved as social beings and to have our opinions influenced by
others that we kind of consider part of our in-group and often
kind of in opposition to people we think are in our out-group,
that we're very...
We are influenced by others and it can be hard to recognize
because I think many of us think of ourselves as independent
minded, but society plays a role and people have a lot of
different kind of discussions online that can help form
opinions and so this is a discussion on Reddit.
Someone's saying, I believe the U.S. should cut all defense
spending and instead spend money on the military.
I know there's a lot of money on the defense budget, but if you
take the money we have, somebody else says you're wrong.
The defense budget is a good example of how badly the U.S.
spends on the military.
Someone else says, yeah, but that's already happening.
There's a huge increase in the military budget.
I didn't mean to sound like stop paying for the military.
I'm not saying that we cannot pay the bills, but I think it
makes sense to cut defense spending.
And so does anyone want to guess what subreddit this is from?
That's right.
So subreddit simulator, which is the GPT-2 subreddit.
So these were all computer generated and they're...
I think if you read these closely, you can tell that
they're a little bit off, but I think they are close to being
compelling of how people might discuss or argue about a topic.
And this is something that I think is, and this is clearly
marked as having been generated by an algorithm.
So it's kind of in good fun, but it's alarming to think about how
this could be used.
So yeah, GPT-2 and it's all marked.
So just raise your hand, who's heard about GPT-2?
And GPT-2 is just part of this whole kind of family of research.
And so it wasn't...
This is a model from OpenAI, and it was kind of along the trajectory
of how natural language research in AI has been going.
But it can produce stories that are quite compelling.
So this is one that they shared when they kind of first published about it.
And so here, the human written system prompt that was given said,
in a shocking finding, scientists discovered a herd of unicorns living
in a remote, previously unexplored valley in the Andes Mountains.
Even more surprising to the researchers was the fact that the unicorns
spoke perfect English.
So that was written by a human and the response from the algorithm,
what the algorithm generated, said, and I'll just read parts of this
to you.
Dr. Jorge Perez, an evolutionary biologist from the University of La Paz,
and several companions were exploring the Andes Mountains when they found
a small valley with no other animals or humans.
Perez noticed that the valley had what appeared to be a natural fountain
surrounded by two peaks of rock and silver snow.
Perez and the others then ventured further into the valley.
By the time we reached the top of one peak, the water looked blue with some
crystals on top, said Perez.
Perez and his friends were astonished to see the unicorn herd.
While examining these bizarre creatures, the scientists discovered that the creatures
also spoke some fairly regular English.
Perez stated, we can see, for example, that they have a common language,
something like a dialect or dialectic.
And so I think that's a really kind of nice story to have been generated
by an algorithm.
And it was, I mean, it was cherry-picked, not everything is this good,
but this is a really good story, and this is computer-generated.
And so this is, I think, concerning particularly when you think about
combining it with other forms of media.
So this is Katie Jones, who is a Russia and Eurasia fellow,
connected to people from several kind of mainstream think tanks on LinkedIn.
And it was revealed that she's not a real person.
So this was discovered by the Associated Press last summer.
This is a computer-generated photo kind of created by a GAN.
And so again, this is a compelling photo.
And so you can start thinking about putting together compelling text with
compelling photos, and fake accounts are going to become much,
much harder to spot.
And I think sometimes, you know, in the past, it felt like, oh, you know,
somebody who has an egg for their Twitter profile.
Like, you know, this is kind of like a troll or not worth responding to.
But those accounts are going to get much, much harder to spot.
You can go to thispersondoesnotexist.com to see other examples of GAN-generated photos.
So again, this is not a real person, not a real person, not a real person.
And I like to highlight this because I think, you know, I think deepfakes and
video are getting a lot of attention, but also to think about just the
combination of what good profile photos and convincing text will be able to do is alarming.
I think online discussions will be swamped with fake manipulative agents,
and also at scale.
So we've been talking about this idea of volume, but what does it mean to kind
of have a high volume?
So something that happened back in 2017, which was a long time ago in
terms of kind of AI research and developments, is that the FCC was
considering repealing net neutrality, and they opened up for comments.
So how do people feel about net neutrality, and they got a lot of comments
that were opposed to net neutrality in favor of the repeal.
Here are a few of them.
Americans, as opposed to Washington bureaucrats, deserve to enjoy the
services they desire.
Civil citizens, as opposed to Washington bureaucrats, should be able to select
whichever service they desire.
People like me, as opposed to so-called experts, should be free to buy whatever
products they choose.
So you can kind of see a pattern here, which has also been
helpfully kind of color highlighted, but basically this is a kind of mad libs
style where you had a few choices for the green spot in the sentence, and then
a few choices for the pink spot, and so on.
And this was discovered by Jeff Kao, who's now a computational journalist
at ProPublica, but he found that there were more than a million pro-repeal net
neutrality comments in this cluster, and it's not just that they're kind of using
this form, it's that they were designed to look unique and to be different
because they're using kind of all these different combinations, and so this is
something, this was great work on Jeff's part that he discovered this, but it was
still relatively primitive when you think about that this was kind of mail
merge style of just plugging in these these different places.
And he did, you should check out this blog post, so he found of over 22 million
comments submitted, less than 4% were truly unique, and that's not all spam,
like there are, you know, campaigns that give you a template to email in, but that
is a really small number of unique comments, and more than 99% of the truly
unique comments wanted to keep net neutrality, but that was very different
than the overall picture you would get if you included kind of these spam
campaigns, and this is something that is is concerning, and also thinking back to
the kind of more sophisticated language models would be very very hard to
identify now, I think, if someone did this. And so yeah, as I've said deepfakes are
getting a lot of attention and are something to worry about, but also we
need to kind of think about all of these things, as well as also primitive
techniques are still really effective, and Photoshop and even just memes on
photos are very effective, so it's it's not just about the latest technology,
although I do think the latest technology can can certainly exacerbate
these things and make them make them even scarier. So my my co-founder Jeremy
said last year we have the technology to totally fill Twitter, email, and the web
up with reasonable sounding, context-appropriate prose which would
drown out all other speech and be impossible to filter, and this also gets
back to this idea of kind of volume and how do we filter through the volume to
even, I don't know, for real people to have a voice as well as kind of fraudulent
campaigns. And the other kind of very concerning aspect of this is that
extreme viewpoints become normalized when we're around others who we think
hold those views, or if we start thinking that more people hold a certain view, it
starts seeming more normal. Actually I should have put people in quotes, but if we
think more more entities hold a view. And so kind of on a very serious note, we've
seen this rise in white supremacist shootings in the last year or two, kind of
mass shootings. So there was kind of the shooting at the Pittsburgh synagogue in
2018 in which 11 people were murdered, and the shooter was very active on
social media and even posted directly before committing the shooting. There was
the shooting at two New Zealand mosques last year in which 49 people were
murdered, and the New York Times characterized this as a mass murder of
and for the Internet. The attack was teased on Twitter, announced on 8chan,
broadcast live on Facebook. The footage was then replayed endlessly on YouTube,
Twitter, and Reddit. And so this is kind of already a very serious problem and we
don't need fancy technology to make this work worse, but it is a concern that
kind of disinformation and kind of more sophisticated language models and
fraudulent accounts could amplify this even further.
Alright, with that this is actually kind of a good stopping point for our break.
So we'll take a kind of seven minute break and the kind of bathrooms and
water fountains are if you kind of turn left towards the end of the hall, and
then we'll come back we'll have some more time for kind of discussion and
also we'll start talking about solutions more too. Alright, so let's
return from return from break. I want to start just by taking questions if there
any questions on the last section about this idea of kind of we've seen new
technology in text generation, so kind of generating compelling language,
generating photos that look like real people but are not, and how this could
could be used to really kind of influence or manipulate public discourse.
Any questions or thoughts? Alright, oh and can you, and it's fine to throw the
catchbox. I shouldn't share this, I hit a girl in the head. She was like she was
fine, but I've been more shy about throwing it since then. Yes, well I'll
talk about that a little more later and I will just say now Mike Caulfield is a
great, he's kind of an expert and on how digital literacy is taught, but he's a
great person to look up, but I do have a slide about him later. It's a good question. Okay
question up here. This might not be the ethical reaction to this, but you know
learning about sort of the arms race around creating this information and how
technology to create this stuff. My mind goes to what are the ethical implications of
fighting it with the same technology, right? Like drowning out the
disinformation. I don't know if there's like a straightforward answer to that, but how much can you use
offensive techniques? I think about security, the security role. Yeah, no and
there are a lot of analogies to security with disinformation. Yeah, in terms of
yeah in terms of drowning out, I don't know, it's an interesting idea, but yeah
it is and I'll talk a little bit more about this later, but yeah like for
instance Renee DiResta and Mike Godwin, who is the original legal counsel to the
EFF, have said you have to think of disinformation as a cybersecurity issue.
Question over here, if you can pass the catch box. So the question is, so
obviously one alternative you could think is like the companies that the
platforms expose this information could have been set is to actually build these
techniques to counter and find good fakes or something like that, because obviously a single
person as this technology is improving would be harder and harder to what is fake, but I'm
sure like big companies, like Google, they can build the tools to do this, right?
But then the problem is, I don't know, even if you think in Twitter when they have to report
every quarter how many active users they have, probably there's a significant
number of users that are fake users and one quarter they have to report, oh yeah, by now
by the way we have like 1 million users less than we report, so obviously
for Google with the ads there's a more than actually the technical or
in other ways the incentive about how the market actually says that, so somehow
I don't know, the government needs to increase the downside, I don't know, right?
Yes, yeah, and so we'll talk more about this later, but yeah, you're hitting on
several things. I mean there are great people at these companies, even
though there's a lot I criticize about the the major companies, there are people
who are working on these problems, but yeah, I think because of the misaligned
incentives and business models that I believe there will be a limit to kind of
how much progress we can do, and I do think policy is going to be one
component of more effectively addressing them. So what should we do
about all of this? So those are some good suggestions. One
thing I wanted to note first is to recognize that often the goal of
disinformation is to disorient us and to weaken our trust and
institutions, and so this is from a post by UHI Bankler earlier this
year that did kind of convict me a little bit because I've definitely been
trying to talk about the harms of disinformation, but remember that kind of
overstating the impact will have the same effect of kind of
weakening people's trust in institutions or in shared knowledge, and so to kind of
keep our perspective and recognize the things that are still working as
well as kind of, I guess, limiting alarmism while taking the threat
seriously. So a brief kind of a positive note, and this was something kind of
pretty simple, is last year Pinterest, so people were sharing a lot of anti-vaxxer
propaganda on Pinterest, and so Pinterest made a change that only kind of
well-respected health organizations could even create pins about anything
related to vaccines or measles or kind of search terms that people were using,
and so this is like the Center for Disease Control, the American Academy of
Pediatricians, and the World Health Organization, and so on. They can make
pins about vaccine safety, nobody else can, and so this is, you know, a relatively
kind of simple solution, but it's something that I think is a really kind
of positive step. I mean, I guess the kind of the downside when platforms step
in like this, although I totally kind of agree with this application, is it is a
lot of a lot of power that the platforms have in terms of how people receive
information and kind of which issues they choose as worth acting on. So
there was a question earlier about what can, oh, and wait let me, can you pass the
catch box? Doesn't the fact that Pinterest has the ability to control
what users are exposed to, like the people who are looking for that
information, wouldn't they take that as further proof that they're hiding
something, that there's sort of these institutions that are working together,
and that anecdotal experiences aren't being shared, that there's some value in
like just a mom saying, hey this thing happened to me, and that another parent
might want to. Yeah, so that argument is made, and that does happen, that
like, yes, this would absolutely, I'm sure it was seen as evidence by anti-vaxxers
that there's a conspiracy theory trying to suppress the truth. I do think such
interventions can, and it's also kind of hard because this is something where
it's, this is pretty late in terms of the kind of growth of anti-vaccine
propaganda, which is something that, I don't know if you've seen, that has been
linked to Russia as well, that there were Russian campaigns kind of both in the US
and Europe promoting anti-vaxxer propaganda. It's hard because yeah,
reacting to it can be seen as further evidence of the conspiracy theory,
although I think there is also an argument that you limit its reach,
particularly if you reacted to something earlier, that fewer people seeing it is a
good thing and can prevent it from from spreading. There's a, in covering
disinformation, there's often kind of this double bind in that even, even
picking up a story just to debunk it and saying, you know, this is false is kind of
giving it more oxygen, and so this is an area that's still being studied of kind
of, there does seem to be some sort of tipping point, which I think is hard to
recognize of, you know, if a conspiracy theory is tiny, you don't, you don't want
to pick it up because you don't want to draw more attention to it, but then often
by the time something is kind of big enough that it's like, oh it's clear, we
need to let people know this is false, it's also really big, and so that's
something where I don't think there's a clear answer on kind of when, when do you
step in. There are, there are best practices for journalists about how do
you debunk something in a kind of more responsible way, but that is kind of a
very fraught area. Yes? And can you pass the catch box a row back?
Are there, so I can tell myself like what is usually a conspiracy theory versus
like research reality or whatever, but is there like frameworks or like
checklists? Great, great question. So Mike Caulfield is who I would recommend on
this topic of digital literacy, and he has a digital literacy course at
lessons.checkplease.cc, and one of his big ideas is that in the past there
was a lot of media literacy that was kind of giving people like, here's how
you can spend a half hour like researching this topic, which nobody's
gonna do, you know, and like you can't do that for every tweet you see in your
Twitter timeline, and so he really promotes like things that you can do in
under a minute because if it's not fast people are just not gonna do it. So I had
often felt a little bit skeptical of some media literacy efforts just in that
so many of these problems are systemic and I don't want to be tasking individuals
with, you know, you have to kind of recognize every false thing. This
post from Mike actually found pretty convincing, and he's very aware like
teaching individuals to recognize issues is not going to solve the
systemic problems and it's not a substitute, but it could help and it can
create more resilient networks. And so he gave an example of this tweet that has
been retweeted 3,000 times claiming that a husband-and-wife Chinese spy team were
recently removed from a level 4 infectious disease facility in Canada
for sending pathogens to the Wuhan facility. So it's making this claim about
a conspiracy theory about about spies and it's linking to the Canadian
Broadcasting Company, which is a very kind of mainstream and respected news
outlet, and so his recommendation is number one click on the link and then
secondly do ctrl F to search for, you know, you probably don't even have time
to read the full link, but just do ctrl F. He also highlights, so ctrl F will
search within a web page. He highlights a study from Google that found that 90
percent of web users do not know about ctrl F, and so they're kind of some kind
of basic digital literacy tools that are very kind of useful even though they
may seem simple. And so he did that, he goes to this this CBC site, he finds that
the word spy does not even show up in the article, threat only shows up once
in saying that there's no threat to public safety. And so this is something
where the tweet has misrepresented the article to kind of try to weave a
conspiracy theory. It's perhaps a little bit of an example of what we were
talking about earlier, and it's also, you know, it's something that you can check
in 30 seconds, you know, you just click the link and he searched for I think a
few other words and then saw like, hey, this article does not seem to support
what was claimed in this tweet. He also, he makes the point like, I mean, there
are plenty of problems with Google search, but doing a Google search of
something before you share it is way better than not, and in many cases will
surface an issue. And so actually if we have time at the end, I'll go into this.
I was going to include it and I wasn't sure about time. He has this game or
links to this game called fake out at the beginning where you have to guess if
things were fake news or not, and it could be harder than you expect, but
those are those are great questions. So I would recommend these materials. And
Ali, can you pass the catch box to the front? This just sort of occurs to me
having been using mobile devices really extensively for the past few weeks. There
is like no control or let's say a smartphone, or at least like not in the
iOS as far as I know, and it occurs to me that given how often people use mobile
devices to use the Internet in general, that could be a challenge of its own, but
that highlights the sort of moral social imperative to think really deeply
about like should Apple implement some sort of way to search for text in the
page that you're currently doing, and like that seemed like such an esoteric
topic until just now. Oh, you should search for the word spy, and if it
doesn't show up then question the veracity of using that link in that
story. That's just sort of like a thought that came to mind. That's a great example and as I say
Stacy Marie Ishmael has a talk that kind of on a similar vein talked about some
ways that mobile is less conducive to like you don't see as much of the URL. In
some cases you can't even tell that the URL is clickable, like it's not apparent
in the design. That there are a lot of things about mobile that are way less
user-friendly to letting users know like you know because for disinformation if
something's from a sketchy URL we know okay that's a bad sign, but on mobile
that is way less clear, and in some apps like in Facebook it's often not clear
like hey what is coming from a link that you can click on, can I see that URL, and
so these are things that yeah might seem like esoteric design decisions but have
a big impact on kind of how users kind of what clues they get that could tip
them off about disinformation. Can you get the, sorry, oh okay you can, so
the comment was just that it was using Twitter for iPhone.
Yeah, I just wanted to ask a question to I guess the group really, but this is so simple. Look for keywords, control
app it, or if you're using Chrome on a mobile device they have the version of
that, but why can't we just automate that? Why can't Twitter just do this for us
and score what it's showing us? I will say that I think this is still kind of a
sophisticated question of, so a lot of people ask, so I do a lot of work in
deep learning as well with fast AI, and people are like oh you know can't you
train a deep learning algorithm to identify disinformation? A lot of it is
very context dependent, and I can think of a lot of scenarios where someone
could summarize an article and use a new vocabulary word and it would be totally
reasonable. You know like part of, part of what makes this suspicious is also just
like hey this does seem like a pretty wild thing, potentially a conspiracy
theory. You know there are other cues that we're kind of picking up around it,
and so this sort of kind of very kind of context dependent is pretty tricky. So I
don't think it's something that could be automated, possibly for, I don't even know
if, I don't feel, I don't feel comfortable making a prediction that it
could be automated, because I think it just involves kind of so much context.
But you're right, it's like very simple for a human to do. Yeah, and it's also
like with these things. The suggestion was that it scores it, right? So it's not that we're
hiding anything, right? You still have the same access to all the same data, you
just get like a score that you can choose what to do with, or not do it. I mean just,
yeah, I mean two issues with that is that if you have, like, is this legitimate? You know like that research project where they ask people and they make them think about it for hours.
One thing I'll say, I mean I like, I like that you're really thinking about this,
if you have a score though that's accurate like 90% of the time, people
will just start trusting it all of the time and not feel like they need to
check the edge cases, and the edge cases are gonna be very significant here.
And so I think, I think there are a lot of risk to that approach, but it probably
is worth exploring further. And then there's a hand kind of two to your left.
I guess the question for you, it seems also pretty easy to game and sort of
stay ahead of that metric. Yes, yeah, when you get to kind of algorithm
dependent, yeah, there is the, yeah, the risk of gaming or figuring out what kind
of what the metrics are.
Okay, I'm gonna keep going, but we'll have more time for questions just
because there's a lot more kind of potential approaches. So that's a little
bit about kind of the role digital literacy could play. Some other
approaches detecting fakes and disinformation. It is important to note
that this is always going to be an arms race, and so if you're familiar with the
idea of a GAN, it's basically you have kind of two algorithms that are learning
from each other, and you can use your detection algorithm to make even more
compelling fakes. Responsible development tools, addressing the ecosystem, treating
as a cybersecurity issue, and verification tools. And I'll get into
kind of all of these in the next few slides. So Aviv Ovadia is a researcher
on kind of how, if you are making tools for synthetic media, how do you do that
responsibly? And so keep in mind like Photoshop is a tool to make synthetic
media. Photoshop has a lot of kind of great and legitimate uses. It can be used
kind of for for art and kind of all sorts of legitimate things, but Photoshop
can also be used to make fake photos. And this is only kind of increasing as
different tools are developed that often have kind of, you know, positive uses and
have kind of scary potential for misuse. And so if you've had an article in the
MIT Tech Review recently with where he kind of goes through what are a few
different kind of like categories of how we how we think about this. So one is
limiting who can use a tool. So that could be if you are carefully
vetting your clients who you give access to, and this would be if you were
developing something that let people alter their voices or create fake videos
or Photoshop, and I know there are people at Adobe that are kind of working
on this issue of disinformation, discouraging malicious use, consent
protection. So this would be if you have something that can kind of generate it,
like make it sound like someone's voice is saying something they didn't say, have
that person have to like say a few kind of generated keys at the beginning to
show that they're consenting to using the tool and having having their voice
altered, making it easier to detect when when something has been changed or
altered. One form of that would kind of be like watermarking it or just making
it clear with the, you know, with an image you might not be able to see what the
original image is, but just to know like, hey this image has been altered. Usage
logs, use restrictions, supporting ethical synthetic media tools, and so he and he
goes into more detail kind of in in this article. So this is, and this is not going
to solve the problem, this is kind of ways to just try to mitigate it. So this
is an idea about our ecosystem. This was an op-ed in the New York Times that I
liked, and so here Siva Vaidhyanathan, who he's written a book on, I think, on
social networks, proposes that we need to be limiting data collection and the use
of personal data to ferry ads and other content to discrete segments of Facebook
users. And so kind of one proposal he gives, and so this is something where it
really gets into kind of the particular laws of a country, but in the U.S. in a
minimum we could restrict targeting of political ads to the level of the
district of the race. So one problem with personalized ad targeting combined with
combined together with disinformation is that disinformation can be shown to just
a very kind of narrow segment of the population. And so, you know, you might not
have any journalists see it and realize like, hey this is being shown to this
kind of very narrow demographic. And this is, I guess this is true both of targeted
ads and also just the way that all our kind of timelines and news feeds are so
personalized to us. We don't know what other people are seeing and so we may
not hear about a common conspiracy theorem that others are hearing about. So
this is kind of one proposal kind of thinking about that targeting there even
if people are spreading disinformation if you have to send it to a larger group,
at least there are more people to like identify it and hopefully debunk it. This
is a report that came out of Johns Hopkins and UNC and one of the
authors said kind of in studying how to regulate digital ads that they found a
kind of surprising amount of bipartisan support and some of the ideas were
having databases of content. And this is something, you know, we're finding now
like we don't even necessarily know all the ads that were shown in the 2016
election, but just to even like have that content be discoverable of kind of who
who is showing, you know, what ads and describes how many of these are kind of
similar to how TV ads are governed. And so kind of remembering that we do have
other mediums like TV that have, even if they have shortcomings, at least have
kind of more governance of advertising.
And then there's a great article by Renee DiResta and Mike Godwin that I
mentioned earlier, the seven-step program for fighting disinformation, but really
thinking about this as a cybersecurity problem and I think there are a lot of
parallels with the cybersecurity here.
Stanford did put out a securing American elections report last year that has a
number of proposals in it. They are all, I will say they are all things that need
to happen kind of on a federal government level though and I think
they're all kind of good suggestions but of kind of what we need to be doing to
countering disinformation and even just to get a good scope of the problem and
kind of what what sort of interference is happening. And I should note it's not
just a not just an election problem or a political problem but that is kind of
one one key avenue where it shows up. And then another kind of another, I don't
know, another category of of tools or things are thinking about giving people
ways to verify themselves. And so Zainab, to fact she wrote an article for Wired
where she used this analogy with Fidel Castro. It's like in 2006 he had surgery
and there were a lot of rumors like is he still alive and so he shared this
picture of him holding that day's newspaper to confirm that he was alive.
And this you know even now like Photoshop is good enough like this
wouldn't be convincing but she talks about kind of we need a digital analog
for this for for people to to verify themselves. If you're familiar with PGP
keys that kind of idea of giving people a way to verify like this is from me at
this time. And she wrote, in the past it often made sense to believe something
until it was debunked. In the future for certain information or claims it will
start making sense to assume they are fake unless they are verified. And this
would require not just kind of whatever verification technology you're using but
also a big cultural shift. So this would be kind of quite a shift. Oren Etzioni
who's the head of the Allen Institute on AI research made a similar proposal
in Harvard Business Review last year. So yeah in summary we have kind of all
these different approaches so practicing kind of good social media habits as a as
an individual and this kind of digital literacy, keeping our perspective. I also
want to highlight just strengthening our institutions such as journalism,
education, universities, and nonpartisan government departments. Kind of these
these play such an important role in in society and doing what we can to to try
to strengthen them. Treating disinformation as a cybersecurity
problem and developing verification tools. And I see a hand back there. Can
you pass the catch box over? So going forward and then I listed some experts
to follow and I also and you can so I started a thread about disinformation on
the forums but you can definitely share kind of people that you follow on this
topic or if you've read articles or have resources that you like on
disinformation please please share them with us. Oh that's it so any any more
questions? Okay there's a question behind you.
I was supposed to comment on cybersecurity. We have lots of different
ways that we think about intrusion of data structure and data integrity. We
don't have that same kind of focus typically on content unless it has some
kind of commercial value. So I think there's a lot of research that can be
immediately applied to just thinking about the corruption of content. Yeah.
You've got disinformation as a way to abrade the actual content itself and not just the
way it's formed or structured let's say in a relational model or some other kind
of graph representation. Yes and actually that reminds me kind of another
way that it's disinformation is like a cybersecurity problem is thinking about
kind of inorganic kind of inauthentic behavior as opposed to I think people
have sometimes thought about disinformation of like oh let me just
look at this individual post or something whereas really you need to
look like do you have kind of this inorganic activity anomaly detection
kind of things that seem inauthentic even if in isolation any one
action or one post may not necessarily be like okay this is definitely
fabricated news.
So you talk a lot about the platforms where going viral is a thing and monetization
but what about the more sort of static platforms like Wikipedia which is often
like a first go-to in which like especially like the young generations
take is like gospel but when you look in the revision history for a lot of the
articles you see this separate arms race going in of back and forth people like
editing leading and yeah just fighting over who gets the post. Yeah no that's
that's a good comparison because yeah Wikipedia in some ways you know not
using kind of ad generated model and not gathering all this user data I would say
at least has had fewer problems than many of the major platforms but
Wikipedia still has significant and serious problems and there's also I know
kind of just you know issues about certain groups kind of getting mass
deleted or kind of the back and forth although on the whole I would say most
people probably consider Wikipedia to be a healthier information ecosystem than
than any of the major tech platforms but you're right you can still definitely
get the kind of editing back and forth although in general I think there are
things that the the tech platforms could potentially learn from Wikipedia as well.
Okay and can you pass the catch box forward to the second row? I'll go quick
I just wanted to like I was just recently reading a paper about
moderation techniques on Wikipedia specifically and I think a lot of the
community supported moderation techniques that they have allows for
stock gates for is specifically what you're referring to. Yeah and they do
like I know like I know Wikipedia like does have ways of freezing posts that
are kind of very contentious although I also Casey Fiesler who I mentioned
earlier who's fantastic did have a thread recently about kind of her her
experience of creating Wikipedia posts and then having people like getting
upset and attacking all her posts and going through her revision history so
yeah I know it's a kind of a mixed bag.
You pass it back to Rose. So back on the social media train how do you think
about reconciling trying to detect like the companies themselves trying to
detect this information and like downright get or remove it or whatever
with the users expectation that their information isn't necessarily all being
scrutinized by the company so like I know for example this would be a huge
problem for whatsapp because like one of their big assets is that the end yeah
but that makes it impossible to really analyze that yeah that's that is a big
issue because yeah there's definitely serious disinformation happening on
whatsapp so you may have seen there's kind of a study of memes being shared in
the run-up to the Brazilian election in which a lot of kind of misinformation
and misleading things were shared and played at least somewhat of a role and
the far-right leader being elected and there's also been this issue in India of
people spreading rumors on whatsapp and several people have been murdered as a
result yeah it's hard I don't have an answer in a in our last minute of class
but yeah if I think of more I'll say more but there is there is I guess in
general I will say so yeah thinking about the importance of privacy I guess
whatsapp has made some changes though and just of how how many groups you can
share something to or I believe like group size so there are still kind of
structural changes you can make while protecting protecting privacy of just
like how how you let people share things and then I'm sorry we're at 8 o'clock so
I'm gonna stop but feel free to either ask next time or to post on the forums